---
title: "Should I join the show?"
description: "This blog post is a reflection in my relationship with a social network, X. I share my thoughts on the unhealthy environment that the platform has become and how it contrasts with the values of the company I'm building, Tuist. I also reflect on the benefits of the web in its raw form and the importance of running marathons over sprints."
tags: ["Mental health", "Social networks"]
---

When I enter X these days, it reminds me of Facebook, which I moved away from long ago. The feed is full of crap, with posts formatting their text in bold to get your attention. People step on each other in a macho-like manner: "Hey! You think you know about this topic, but let me tell you that I know more than you." It feels like a show where people are feeding their narcissism, and X tries to get everyone’s eyes on debates. Not everything is like this, but most of the feed the algorithm designed for me.

As someone who devoted many years to X, I see X as an opportunity to promote the company I'm helping build, Tuist. Yet, it is challenging in such an unhealthy and noisy environment. People are getting used to the attention-seeking content that makes you sound boring. And so, you wonder if you should be doing like the others. "What are we doing here?" We don't belong to this game, which is often our answer. But then "Are we putting building a thriving business at risk?" follows. To which I often conclude: "I doubt." So, is my time there over?

 I’ve been thinking a lot lately about running sprints versus marathons. These days, running sprints and feeding the platform are many of what’s encouraged. Running marathons is not encouraged at all. The quantity is more important than the quality. Keep feeding the system. But this feels so out of alignment with our values and the type of company we want to build with Tuist. We prime quantity over quality. We want to move slowly but steadily because that means perspective to have great ideas. We don't need to capture people's attention because attention would become our goal. And that, as a goal, leads to Frankenstein tools that mimic everyone's attention needs. Solutions that are not about people's needs but what they'd talk about. I call this Attention-Driven-Product-Design.

X brought me great things but also kindled the worst aspects of my personality. I experienced envy, unhealthy competition, anger, and grief, among others. Many days, I felt terrible at the end of the day. Also, there were days when I wasted my mental energy figuring out a catchy thing to share. It felt as if X had kidnapped my mental agency in a way.

"You need to find a good balance," people say... Yet, why would I be there if Internet is such a fantastic place with much better alternatives? Sure! Mastodon or your website won’t have as much reach as an attention-seeking post on X, so what?  The content on Mastodon, a forum or an RSS-subscribable blog, will resist time. Who knows... tomorrow someone might find something useful in a post I wrote five years ago. The same is very unlikely on X. The content will be accessible to anyone with a web browser, even without JS enabled. I embrace the web in its most essential form, placing the focus on the content. It’s beautiful and liberating to peel the layers that people created and embrace the Web in its more raw form.

But it takes time and conscious effort. There are many patterns that I need to revert and reminders about my values. I helps a lot to see everything as a marathon. When I do that, I'm mentally relieved, happier, and with a stronger sense of fulfillment.
